
Hey. This is John at Bible Project. We're in the middle of a series looking at how to read the New Testament letters. These are the small books in the back of your Bible written by the apostles of Jesus and written to early church movements spread out across the Roman world. Right now, we're looking at the situational context of the communities who received these letters.

One thing we're gonna look at today is how it's hard to know when Paul is saying something original and when he's quoting what someone else had said. And this might not seem like a big deal, but let's check out first Corinthians seven verse one. In the NIV, we see Paul write this. Now for the matters you wrote about. So now we're gonna expect him to quote something they wrote about, and he does.

It begins with a quote. Quote, it is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman, unquote. But then Paul goes on. But since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should have sexual relations with his own wife and each woman with their own husband. But here's the thing, I'm looking at the New American Standard.

They do not mark that phrase in quote marks. And so what it forces the reader to do is to put together some kind of logic for the flow of thought because it doesn't mark it as not Paul's voice. The first Bible I was given as a study Bible was a New American Standard. I remembered struggling with first Corinthians seven, trying to figure out Paul's line of thought. His opening line is, it's good for men not to touch women.

And then, the next line is, but because of immorality, each one should have his own wife and each woman should have her own husband. And then, on that reading, marriage becomes a concession. So look at this verse with two different translations. And one could indicate that Paul only approves of marriage as a concession due to our sex drive. While the other would indicate that Paul is responding to a specific question that the church of Corinth had asked him.

And since the original language doesn't have quotation marks, we have to do our best to figure out where they should go. Here's the whole point. Paul regularly is quoting excerpts of previous conversations or what people are saying. I think the stakes are high in this section of the Bible because, again, they're so quotable. It's easier to take them out of context, statements out of context, than many other parts of the Bible.

And so I think it really pays off to develop a thoughtful set of reading skills. So today, we're gonna look at Paul's quotes in his letters and the importance of using a variety of translations and more. That's all ahead. Thanks for joining us. Here we go.

We're gonna finish up the conversation from last episode, which is how to read the New Testament letters in their situational context. Yes. Yep. This should be the last installment of this part of our conversation about the New Testament letters. So the big idea has been there's 19 books of the Bible.

Mhmm. Though they're They're called books. They're the shortest books of the Bible because they're not actually books, they are letters. In the New Testament, they were written by the first circle of leaders who were around Jesus or who met the risen Jesus, and then they planted Jesus communities around the Mediterranean, and then wrote letters to them. Yeah.

Some are long quicker than others. Some are longish and longer than your average ancient letter, which we'll talk about that more in the next part of our conversation. But Little fun fact that I didn't know until recently, maybe last five years or so, is that they're ordered by length. Oh, yes. Or Paul's letters, because there's 13.

Paul's letters. Paul's letters. They're organized by length, not by the order in which they were written. Yeah. And, actually, if you read them in the order in which they're written, which there's a bit of debate about how some books relate together.

Is Galatians the first or is are the Thessalonian letters the first? Even if you can't decide, they're within a few years of each other. Mhmm. But, yeah, if you read them in order, it's really fascinating because you're actually getting little snapshots of the events of Paul's missionary journeys. Mhmm.

And it's really interesting stuff. Yeah. But Romans is the last oh, Romans is is the last before The last one he wrote. Before the imprisonment and then you get what are called the pastorals. Okay.

Titus and first and second Timothy. Second Timothy, he's writing from prison certain that he's gonna die. It's almost certainly the last thing that came from Paul. But Romans, is the caps at the capstone of his missionary journeys before the arrest and being imprisoned for years. Mhmm.

So anyway, it's interesting to read the letters that way, but they're not organized that way in our Bibles today. Right. That was just supposed to be a little fun fact, and then somehow No. It's still a fun fact. Found a way to say a lot more about it.

Even a it's more fun of a fact. So, Yeah. Context context context has been the theme of our discussion. Where do these letters fit in the whole story of the Bible? We talked about that.

That's one layer of context. Mhmm. How do these letters fit into the context of the Roman world in which they were written? Yeah. We talked about that.

And then these are letters. These are act written to communities of people who were dealing with very specific things. That's the third layer of context. What's the situation in which Paul was writing these letters? Yeah.

Or, John or Yep. Peter. Yeah. Yep. Yeah.

Or Jacob. Yeah. Yeah. Also known as James. Also known as James.

Two Westerners. Yeah. So we talked a bit through Mhmm. We just kinda looked through in Galatians and Philippians and in Corinthians. Mhmm.

And you kinda walked through this kinda detective Mhmm. Hunt Yeah. Of how do we see what would the situational context was? And it was all right there. Yeah.

Yeah. It was it wasn't too hard. It wasn't very hard. Once you start looking for it, you can see it's there. Yeah.

Yeah. You know, I think a lot of Bibles often have a little summary before these letters. Oh, that do some of that for you? Some of that? Yeah.

Sure. I think I think that's a common thing I've seen. But then we also looked at a couple examples or one in particular where you have no idea what the situational context was. That's right. And at least you just kinda hang in like, well Yeah.

I don't know what this was about. Correct. What was interesting about that example, which was Paul just mentioning offhand, this practice called the baptism for the dead Yeah. Is that in its context of the paragraph as a whole, you actually can get his idea of the paragraph Yeah. Without knowing that Mhmm.

Specific background knowledge. Right. So again, as observers of someone else's mail, we can get the basic idea even when you don't know the particulars. But if we did know the particulars, it would probably illuminate why he brings it up, but it's just lost to his history. So it's like situational context is very helpful, but not always essential.

I think it's very helpful, and I think we should consider it an essential part of the next level of studying and understanding these letters. But we need to recognize our limits, the limits of our knowledge Mhmm. And the limits of the genre that the Holy Spirit has chosen to be the vehicle of God's word to his people, which is a theme that we've also come back to. Yes. Why?

Multiple points in this in this Why did God choose this genre of someone's male to be his word to us. Yeah. Why Tim or why? Oh, why Tim? Who can know such things?

I don't know. Whenever there's a question that's why did God or why does God? You're in. I immediately murky territory. Yeah.

I'm just like, that's a wonderful question. Let's just Oh, the depth of the riches. Yeah. Let's just know we're entering into territory that isn't isn't ours to know. What we do know is what has happened and what the Holy Spirit has given us.

And there you go. So what I would I'd like to do to finish is that practice, that detective work of trying to reconstruct the situation, into which the Apostle is writing. That method or that approach has been given a name in New Testament scholarship. So I wanna just both name it, talk about a couple scholars who have contributed to helping kinda hone it as a tool set, and then flesh out one example where there's just lots of payoff. Cool.

And that's the book of Romans? Yeah. I think it may be helpful to do in the video. Although, we could choose any of the books that we've covered. But for the video, we're going to want in a concrete example for each of these levels of context.

Sure. I think. Yeah. It would probably be helpful to use the same letter throughout Mhmm. As opposed to different letters Yeah.

With the different kinds of context. So this method is, has been given the name mirror reading. I first came across this in the work of a New Testament scholar named John Barclay, who I'm just realizing we brought up Mhmm. Already in this conversation. Then we talked about mirror reading.

Make it different. Oh, that's right. And that we talked about the phrase even. Yeah. That's right.

Okay. Yeah. So John Barclay wrote, an essay about Paul's letter to the Galatians. Because, throughout in the modern history of interpreting that letter, people have gotten a little excited about their ability to reconstruct Mhmm. The problem in Galatia.

Mhmm. And who caused the problem, and when did it start, and These are the people preaching the other gospel. That's right. The the Messianic Jewish missionaries who say you have to be join the ethnic Jewish nation Yeah. To become a part of the Messianic family of God.

So what they'll do is they'll actually look for unique phrases in Paul's line of thought or something that he'll say would be like, that's an odd thing for Paul to say. Mhmm. And then they'll reconstruct. Well, that was probably a line from Paul's antagonist, and he's quoting their words, but back at them, throwing it back at them in some way. That happens in Corinthians a lot.

Exactly. Where he, like he'll say something and some people will say, well, that he's just quoting Yes. Good. The people of that day. Here.

Let's take time to focus on this because this is important. Okay. Look at first Corinthians chapter seven Okay. With me. Food for the body and the body for food?

Or No. We'll look at that one in just in a half second. But so the first sentence of first Corinthians chapter seven, Paul shifts. In chapters one through six, he's been responding to things that he's heard about, reports that he's gotten. Like, remember we looked at in the last episode, he got a report from the people who attend the house church that Chloe is in charge of.

So in chapter seven, he starts responding to things in a letter that they wrote to him. And so chapter seven begins, now concerning the things that you wrote, and then the next part of the sentence is, it is good for a man not to touch a woman. In NIV, that's a quote. It's a it's quoted. Exactly right.

Exactly right. So this phrase, it is good for a man not to touch a woman. As you go on on through the chapter in the next paragraph, he goes on to talk about how you you're like, it's good for men and women to get married, especially if it's a man or woman who, you know, has really struggles with self control over their sexual impulse, which is like most humans I've ever met. Yeah. So that's kind of it's an odd glitch in the logic.

Yeah. If you don't understand that what he's doing is quoting from the letter. Yeah. So there are some people who have taken Paul to mean or that they have developed a theology of that if you're really gonna follow Jesus, you will be unmarried just like him. Yeah.

And so, it's good for men not touch a woman. And this one's pretty clear because in the very next sentence Yes. He says. Yeah. But since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should Correct.

Have sexual relations with his wife. Okay. But here's the thing. I'm looking at the New American Standard. They do not mark They don't quote it.

That phrase in quote marks. And so what it forces the reader to do is to put together some kind of logic for the flow of thought. Mhmm. Because it it doesn't mark it as not Paul's voice. Does that make sense?

Mhmm. I remember reading this. The first Bible I was given as a study Bible was a new American standard. I remembered struggling with first Corinthians seven trying to figure out Paul's line of thought. Mhmm.

Because he for the longest time, it was just like what he his opening line is it's good for men not to touch women. You're contradicting yourself. Yeah. And then the next line is, but because of immorality, each one should have his own wife and each woman should have her own husband. And then on that reading I see.

Marriage becomes a concession. The the ideal is not to get married, but because you're all like, you know, such slaves to your separate family. Is, You should get married. And n a s b Mhmm. Verse two starts with but.

Yes. And that even, like, makes it seem more like a concession. Exactly. However, if the phrase, it is good for a man not to touch a woman is a line from some Corinthians who are promoting a celibacy as superior to marriage, then it makes sense why he would begin verse two with a but to contrast what they're saying. Mhmm.

Here's the whole point. Paul regularly is quoting excerpts of previous conversations or what people are saying. But in the original language, there's no quotation marks. There's no quotation marks. It's an interpretive decision.

Now, some of those are controversial. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, this one is probably a bit controversial whether or not it's a quote or not, but I'm trying to remember specifically about the food one, I think. Mhmm.

There was just I remember really sensing the, like, who knows? I I couldn't I couldn't discern. Yeah. Yeah. That's right.

Yeah. In the previous paragraph before chapter seven is the last paragraph of chapter six in first Corinthians. And chapter six verse 12 begins with this line, all things are lawful for me, but not all things are profitable. All things are lawful for me, but I won't be mastered by anything. Yeah.

Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food, but God will do away with both of them. However, the body is not for immorality, but for the Lord and the Lord is for the body. So there's something happening here. He repeats this line twice, all things are lawful for me, and then he goes on to contradict it. All things are lawful, but not everything's profitable.

All things lawful, I won't be mastered. Mhmm. Then this thing about how food is for the stomach and God will do away with both of them, and then he starts talking about the body and immorality. So if you look at the different modern translations, what you'll notice is that different translations put quotation marks. Yeah.

Are you looking at the new international version? Actually, I just switched to NASB. There's no quotes. No quotes. Yep.

NAS won't do that. They want the reader to have to do the homework. Right. ESV or the NIV. NIV has quotes.

I switched to NASB because you read it lawful for me to Mhmm. What did you how did you read it? All things are lawful for me. And then NIV says I have the right to do anything. Oh, yeah.

Yeah. I'll That's because it's kinda like a paraphrase. Yeah. It's a bit of a paraphrase. Yeah.

And but that's in quotes. Yep. Then not everything is beneficial Mhmm. Is not in quotes. Correct.

So in other words, they're helping you see that Paul is quoting here, again, somebody or some group in the church of Corinth that believes because of their liberation in Christ, they have a new moral freedom Mhmm. That in Paul's opinion, they are misusing and hurting themselves and other people. Now what I wanna know is does Paul agree I have the right to do anything Mhmm. Or not? Well, okay.

So here in this context, the what this is gonna be is particularly about there's some men in the church of Corinth who are continuing the tradition of attending banquets at Temples. Temples down the street. Yeah. And these are mostly not all of them. Some of them have female priestesses.

Most of them this is a male all male deal. And the whole night of worship and sacrifice and banqueting ends with a lot of wine and then in come the temple prostitutes. Mhmm. So just lots of sex. Right.

And so Paul recommends for the most part, later on the letter, just staying away Yeah. From the temples. Yeah. But these people seem to have the, yeah, conviction that, listen, I don't believe in Zeus or Apollo. Yeah.

I I don't think that idol statue there has any power over me, but my friends are going down there. I have freedom in Christ to let go. Right. And so Paul will say, okay. Right?

So you technically, you're not in danger of any spiritual power there. But some things are really foolish and are gonna lead you to being, yeah, enslaved to really destructive habits. That's his point. Yeah. And so here's what's interesting.

In verse 12, he's almost certainly quoting somebody at Corinth. I have everything is lawful for me. Paul contrasts or disagrees, but not everything's beneficial. He quotes him again. Now how how are you pretty certain that it's a quote?

Oh. Or why is NIV certain it's a quote? You just have to get into take a deep dive into the interpretation of the letter. The fact that it's the same identical phrase Mhmm. That he immediately contradicts it.

Mhmm. Here's this thing, but not all things. Here's all things are lawful, but I won't be mastered. And here's actually where it gets really interesting. Verse 13.

Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food. NIV marks that as a quote. Yes. In other words, this would be a line where he's quoting, I think, essentially The philosophers of the day or Yeah. People debate about what this line actually is, but it seems to be that listen food is natural.

It's just material. It goes into my stomach. My stomach's for food. Mhmm. But then he immediately starts talking about sex.

Paul starts he contrasts that statement, starts talking about sex. The body isn't for immorality. I think the logic of this line, there's a lot of smart people, but the people on the translation committees disagree, that think that the quote actually extends longer. Mhmm. Here would be the quote for of the Corinthians in verse 13.

Food is for the stomach, and the stomach is for food. Listen. God's gonna do away with all of it. In NIV, that's the full quote. In NIV?

Yeah. Oh, hey. Good for them. Mhmm. Wow.

I forgot about that. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. Okay.

Good for them. Okay. I think the NIV is correct. Mhmm. And so do a lot of other, really important scholars on first Corinthians.

Mhmm. The ESV has the quote end in the middle of verse 13. Food is for the stomach and the stomach's for food, end quote. End quote. And then Paul responds, listen.

God's gonna destroy them both. So in other words, what's that debate here is, does God care what I do with my body? Mhmm. Does it matter what I do with my body in regard to food or sex? Mhmm.

If you read the ESV, Paul quotes a line, food is meant for the stomach. The stomach is meant for food. That's what the Corinthian is saying. And then Paul's response in the ESV is, listen, God's gonna destroy food and the body. Which is really not Paul's theology.

No. Well, depends on how you understand his theology. Yeah. If you think that Paul's, has a worldview in which the physical world is inherently bad and has to be destroyed so that a disembodied non physical spiritual reality that's eternity is truly what's good, then this would make good sense. You get the ESV's interpretation.

But Paul believes in a resurrected body. Yes. Now I guess the question is, does God he has to destroy one body to create the other. Mhmm. So I guess you could still say that Mhmm.

That's what Paul means. Mhmm. But it seems like the point here, as you were saying, is what you do with your body is important. Yes. That's right.

And So he wouldn't just just be like, ah, God's gonna destroy the body. If your body's not important Correct. That wouldn't be your point. Correct. And because what he's about to go on and say is your body is really important.

Yeah. You're the temple of God. Yeah. So, okay. Let's go with the NIV then.

You, Corinthians, say food is for the stomach, the stomach's for food. Listen. God's gonna destroy it both. I can overeat. I can sleep with a prostitute.

This body's going away. Mhmm. Why does God care what I do with the body? Why does God care what we do on this with the sinking ship? Mhmm.

Surely, God wouldn't care about that. Mhmm. It's of no value for eternity because eternity is not earthly. And Paul in the NIV's reading, which I and a lot of people smarter than me think is correct, Paul disagrees radically. He says, no.

Listen. First of all, the body is not designed to be joined sexually to somebody you haven't made a marriage covenant to. Mhmm. And he assumes that they know what he thinks about that. Then he says, listen, the body is for the Lord and the Lord is for the body.

By his power, God raised the Lord from the dead. Yeah. And he will raise us too. And don't you know, your bodies are members of the Messiah himself. Yeah.

So you can see his logic here. He cares about the body. Your body is destined for transformation and resurrection. Yeah. And your resurrection body is It's connected to this body.

Connected to Jesus' resurrection body. And so what you do with your present body as a member of the Messiah's people is actually you're doing it to Jesus' body. Mhmm. Oh. It's not your body.

Yeah. Your body matters when it comes to food or sex. Anyhow, the whole point is Paul is in more than one letter quoting and in more than one place quoting from excerpts of their letters of the people who write to him or the people he's writing to. Is that really tricky? Dude, tell me about it.

Because, like, anytime I don't like what Paul's saying, I could just say, oh, he's quoting someone else. Okay. Sure. So you have to build up criteria. Here it's fairly clear because if you try and put together the logic of the paragraph, it's really difficult if this is all Paul's voice.

So the whole question is this is why John Barclay, all the way back to this thing. If we go back, this is why John Barclay was compelled to bring a little order to the chaos. Mhmm. And create key questions and criteria to help you know that you are really what Paul is saying really is Mhmm. In response to Yeah.

The guardrails. The guardrails. That's right. This is also a really great example of the value of using more than one translation. Mhmm.

One of the most common questions I hear coming through Yeah. Is what translation of the Bible should I read? Yes. Yeah. And I think it'd be a great video to make one day.

Yes. Good point. But, your answer is always use as many as you can Yeah. That's right. As you dare.

And the translations are like golf clubs. Yep. That's right. And they all have a different purpose. Yeah.

And the NASB here says, hey. Our purpose is to to make you work for it. Yep. That's right. We want we wanna just be as close to the original as possible.

Mhmm. But then we have the NIV and the ESV are both saying, no. We're gonna we're gonna help you a bit more. Mhmm. But then by reading them both, you realize, oh, there's a discrepancy here.

Mhmm. And so it's not Olly Olly Oksenfree where it's like, I could put quotes wherever. Correct. You're kind of like, you've got these translation bodies Yeah. Who have said, here's what we think, and then here's what we think, and now you're in the playing field.

That's right. And you know where everyone's been. That's right. And this is a issue specific to the New Testament letters where Paul has to address people in these churches who disagree with him and who have let Paul know about their disagreement. Mhmm.

And so he has to engage them like you would in a letter. Yeah. I mean, it makes perfect sense. Right. So there's just, you know, we're talking about a handful of passages throughout all of his letters where this is really an interpretive challenge.

So John Barclay wrote an essay, and then another scholar who's in the Portland area, his name is Nijay Gupta Mhmm. Wrote an essay just a few years ago. Well, 02/2012, I guess. Also, kind of honing in and dialing in these criteria. I learned a lot from this.

But so mirror reading. We've already talked about what, The side view mirror? Yeah. That's right. Alright.

That's right. So here are some criteria that these scholars propose. K. When we hypothesize about the situation that the apostle's writing into. And this isn't just for when they're quoting or not quoting.

This is for Yep. How do we figure out the situational context? Yep. That's right. That's right.

So, the first thing they go to is what kind of utterance somehow, the moment I'm saying the word utterance, it sounds funny. It is a funny word. Out loud. It's a very funny word. I guess it's because the word utter.

Utter? Oh, you mean like a cow's udder? Yeah. Language is so funny. I'm saying utterance, but what I'm thinking of is a cow's utter, and that's so weird.

It's all well, it's just the word you don't use. Yeah. That's right. Utterance. In other words, What does that mean, that type of letter?

Okay. I'm sorry. Let's just change it. Type of statement. A type of statement?

Letters are her prose, discourse, pieces of literature that make points, develop, and support those points in a developing line of thought k. To communicate something. Right. Series of statements. A series of statements.

That's right. And so there's types of statements. Correct. Right off the bat Mhmm. Help me understand that.

What do you mean there's types of statements? Types of statements. Here. Let's just What's like a really common like, there's a question or there's a answer. Those are two different types of statements?

Correct. Question, answer, assertion, denial, a command, a prohibition. Yeah. Any I mean, there's yeah. A very large laundry list of types of statements.

I've never thought about categorizing statements. Oh, what kind of statement am I making right now? You get the point. Yes. You get the point.

Every sentence that you utter is a type of statement. The question is, let's say, in one of Paul's letters, he keeps hammering a point home with lots of assertions. And an assertion is this is true. I'll just give some examples here. The letter to the Galatians Well, hold on.

An assertion saying there's many types of statements. That's an assertion. That's true. Yeah. Okay.

You're you're making a claim about what is true. Okay. Yep. Yeah. An assertion is to assert something that you believe is true.

K. Paul's letter to the Galatians opens up saying, Paul, an apostle, I was sent not from humans or by a human. I was sent by Jesus the Messiah and God the father who raised him from the dead. To all the brothers and sisters in churches of the equation. Yeah.

So he introduces himself feeling like he needs to make a strong assertive claim. About his About his credentials. To speak for Jesus. Yeah. Yeah.

So right there, you can infer why does he need to say that. There must be somebody around Galatia who's saying that Paul, he's just a human with his own opinions, and you shouldn't listen to him. So you're saying if there's an assertion Mhmm. You could guess that situationally that assertion Yep. Paul is countering someone else's assertion.

Correct. Or at least we should be open to that. Yeah. In other words, he's not writing these letters just to wax eloquent on theology and ethics. Okay.

There are things that motivate him. That's true. Because if you're reading a theological essay, there's gonna be all sorts of assertions Yeah. That are just trying to Mhmm. Create a philosophical paradigm Yep.

Infrastructure. A theoretical kind of complete statement. Yeah. Yeah. And you're saying in a letter Yeah.

You don't really tend to do that. For the most part. There are many criteria, and these all have to work together. K. To make a compelling case for a mirror reading, you know, of the situation in Galatia, you need a whole bunch of mutually supporting ideas.

Yeah. Okay. Right. A criteria. But this is one of them.

Yeah. Paul's making an assertion. Mhmm. There might be a teaching of the opposite. Correct.

He's countering. Yep. Here's just another example. Paul's letter to Timothy, the first letter to Timothy, opens up the first paragraph after the kind of necessary pleasantries of, like, Paul, an apostle to Timothy, grace and mercy. It's the standard introductions.

First paragraph. Okay. So remember I urged you in Macedonia, and I went to Macedonia, stay in Ephesus so you can command certain people to stop teaching bad theology and stop devoting themselves to myths and endless genealogies. These promote controversial speculation. They don't advance God's work.

That's the first thing. So this is On his mind. This is a command given to Timothy, but very clearly, here, it's a command, implies that people are either doing or not doing the thing Yeah. That people are doing. I guess It starts with the command.

There's actually a prohibition, isn't it? Mhmm. I want people to stop doing this. It presumes, like, oh, there's a bunch of people doing this. That's why he has to write it.

How many types of statements is Barclay, like, outlined? More than I have here. I just have four. Like, how geeky does this get? Oh, well, I just think you're what you're trying to do is fill out as many different kinds of statements, and then the next criteria is the tone of these statements, then the next criteria is the frequency of these statements.

So if there's a certain denial How much freedom do I have? Like because I'm I don't have a complete list of statements. Mhmm. And let's say I'm not gonna read Berkeley. Yeah.

But I wanna take this principle. Mhmm. It seems like, you know, I understand language. I I use language. Mhmm.

So I could just be like, okay. What kind of statement is this? And I could come up with my own words, and I could get pretty far with figuring out, oh, okay. Because right here, you've got command or prohibition and assertion, and we were bouncing around being like like, oh, it's a command. Actually, it was a prohibition.

Oh, actually, there's an assertion at the end of that too about reality. Well, I was mistaken about the command. It was act it's a prohibition. So it's clearly a prohibition. Forbidden.

Throw a command in there. He starts with a command. Prohibition is I want people to stop doing this. Yes. A command is, I want people to do this.

Well, he said he commands Yes. That's right. Someone to go somewhere. Yeah. I want Timothy.

I asked you to stay in Ephesus so that you could command people. You stay in Ephesus command. Yeah. That's right. So that you could command That's right.

People to do this this prohibition. To exactly. And then he ends it with an assertion. Oh, that's true. Yeah.

So you put that all that together and be like, okay. There's people doing a certain thing. Paul has this view on it, and this is what he wants to have happen. Yeah. He does it with great frequency throughout the letter.

Mhmm. People teaching bad theology based on their interpretation of the early chapters of Genesis, especially the genealogies. Mhmm. That's what he's talking about here. The next paragraph is he goes on to talk about how the Torah is great, but these bad theologians wanna be teachers of the Torah.

Uh-huh. And they're introducing division. It's terrible. And so as you go throughout first Timothy, what you're gonna see is there's a certain group of men. There's a certain group of women who are creating a lot of problems in Ephesus based on their bad interpretations of the early chapters of Genesis.

Almost every chapter of first Timothy, this problem is going to surface. And so what you have to do is look at the type of statements. You have to look at the tone. Barclays, second criteria. Look at the tone.

Does he is he just, like, kinda, you know, feel calm about it? This is also probably a time to use a lot of different translations. Oh, interesting. Because tone Oh, yeah. Can differ.

I mean, it's really hard to convey tone in written language. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good point. Here, let me just finish the criteria as a whole.

K. And then we can do more examples if we want. Alright. The next criteria is frequency. In other words, does it just come up in one paragraph in the letter, or does it this issue keep coming up?

Mhmm. And in first Timothy, it's a good that's a great example, because bad interpretations of the early chapters of Genesis keeps coming up throughout the letter. Specifically Genesis? Mhmm. Or the group of people associated with that bad theology.

And there's a group of men and there's a group of women. A fourth criteria for Barclay is he says consistency. This is interesting. In other words, in some letters, like in first Corinthians, Paul is explicitly shifting topics. Topic to topic to topic.

Now about the matters that you wrote to me. Yeah. I got this report from Chloe's people. Yeah. Now about the matters of the spirit.

Mhmm. Here's what I've heard about you. This is how the Corinthians lettered. So basically, the Corinthian church is just full of problems. Yeah.

And the whole debate is, is there one group or one Right. You know, type of person or theology underneath it all? It seems like it's there's a whole bunch of different things. But, for example, in first Thessalonians, there's a broad set of issues that Paul addresses. But, it does seem like you can tie it all together to one underlying problem, which is people who are overzealous about predictions about, the return of Jesus and are getting really fanatical and irresponsible with it.

And this really explains almost everything he has to address in the letter. Mhmm. It's really interesting. So consistency. Can I paint a picture of all of the different things that Paul has to address?

Mhmm. Can I paint Their common thread? Their common thread. Yep. And then another criteria is what Barclay calls historical plausibility.

Is there anywhere else in the New Testament where I find that this same set of issues was a problem? Is there anything in the post New Testament era, in the writings of the early church where we see this problem or this type of theology resurfacing? Right. So Berkeley has actually about four or five more criteria. But I I found this really helpful.

Yeah. And this may be we don't need to put this in the video. Right. This is like a little bonus stuff for the podcast listeners. But I found this so helpful to just be asking this question as I'm reading the letters.

Is there a certain problem that keeps resurfacing? Yeah. Paul keeps addressing? What types of statements does he use to address it? And can I infer from that the actual language or theology of the group that he has to deal with?

So, again, this is all about whether or not I can reconstruct Mhmm. What's happening Yeah. Situationally in these letters. Can I look behind my shoulder Yeah? Yes.

That's right. And see what's actually there. That's right. K. You can see there's something in the mirror.

Mhmm. Right? In the side view mirror of your car. We've got the letter. You just guide me.

You read through it, a first blush, and you're like, oh, yeah. There's some problems here Yeah. That Peter or Paul is addressing. So if you wanna do the safety look over your shoulder and be like, I wanna figure out a little more here. What kinds of questions should I be asking?

That's where these criteria, become helpful. And so this is guardrails. Yeah. So that if if you come up with this hypothesis of like, oh, I bet I bet something's happening Mhmm. In the church, and you can get even really specific.

Mhmm. Then you can go, well, is it historically plausible? Mhmm. Is there other people that have had this problem? Yeah.

Did Paul just kinda mention this one time, and now I'm building a whole theory around it? Mhmm. Mhmm. Or is it something he keeps coming back to over and over? Yeah.

So consistency and frequency. Mhmm. Yeah. The tone of his language. Does he sound angry?

And again, that's hard in translations, but or do they sound like there's urgency? Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah.

That's right. Yeah. This is definitely this is not intro Bible reading. I wouldn't introduce this to people, like, at level one. Yeah.

But it's very intuitive too. It is. It is not like That's right. None of these are counterintuitive. Correct.

In a way, this would be what you are doing if you're having an intense conversation with anybody. Yeah. It's being a good listener. It's being you're we're trying to be good listeners to the apostles Yeah. So that we understand the situations that they're speaking into, which can then help us get a bigger frame of reference for understanding.

Yeah. What the whole letter might be. These points could be like, a book on marriage communication too. Tone of voice. Yeah.

Yeah. What kind of statement was that? Oh, yeah. How often did he make these statements? Totally.

Oh, yeah. My wife and I have this conversation all the time because sometimes one of us will make a statement that really is an assertion. No. I'm sorry. We'll make an assertion that's really is an accusation.

Yes. Right. You know? Right. Boy, you slept in this morning.

Yes. Right. Right? And, what you know, she might really mean is, like, hey, you left me hanging Yes. For the boys' breakfast and to pack their lunches today.

What's the deal? You're right? Mhmm. And that's a valid observation and accusation. Yeah.

Yeah. Exactly. Let's look at Romans then and then tease it out. Okay. So Romans, I actually thought we could tease out all the levels of the three levels of context.

All three levels. We've done so far. Right. And we've kind of already done it for Romans in some previous episodes. But let's just kinda give it give a fresh start at it.

Paul's letter to the Romans. This is a network of house churches, people who live in in Rome. In the capital city of the dominant World Empire. Not because they are Roman citizens. They actually are Mhmm.

They live in Rome. They live in Rome and some of them are, yeah, Roman citizens. Yeah. So we're gonna see. I think I've already mentioned this book in our conversations.

Reading But recent book, that Scott McManus, reading Romans backwards. So so helpful. And I'm gonna actually we'll implement that in just a moment here. But if I look in the first paragraph, Paul gives a very clear portrait of how where he sees himself in the grand biblical narrative. In fact, we've already read this paragraph Yeah.

In a previous episode. He is an emissary who's out announcing the good news. The apostle. Yep. He's an apostle.

And that's what you mean by an emissary. Yep. He's set apart for the good news. We're in Romans one one. One one.

Opening sentence of Romans. He's introducing himself Mhmm. As somebody sent, appointed by Jesus as an emissary whose life is given to announcing the good news. What's the good news? Assertion.

Assertion? It's the storyline of the Hebrew scriptures about this God's son who is up from the line of David and also who was raised from the dead and declared by that act to be not just the son of David, but the son of God. And he is Jesus Messiah, our Lord. And through him, we've received this gift of being his emissaries to summon all the nations to give their obedience to him through faithful allegiance for his namesake. And you know what?

You all are I love how you're just translating on the fly. Well, I'm paraphrasing. You're paraphrasing. I mean, you're Interpret paraphrasing. But You're kinda creating your own translation on the fly.

Yeah. I love it. If you're listening to this, you could follow along with any translation, and you can see what's happening. Yeah. Yeah.

That's right. Yeah. And then he includes all of it to all of you who are in Rome. And you are also called among God's holy people. Grace and peace to you.

So there you go. We've talked about this at length earlier in the series. Yeah. But this is it's time for all the nations to First level of context. Yes.

What is happening in the whole story of God in the world? That's right. There is a cosmic king Mhmm. Who is, from the family of David, which was from the family of Abraham, but is also Mhmm. The Lord.

Yeah. The son of God. God's second self become human. And he's now, yeah, exalted, up, sitting at the right hand. He's the divine human image from Genesis one who now rules over all creation.

And this is spreading to the nations. This news is spreading. Which was the point. Yeah. So All along.

Yeah. To summon all nations, verse five, to believing obedience or believing loyal allegiance, to write this to a group of people living in the capital city of the empire where the emperor lives, summoning all nations to give their loyal trusting allegiance to him. Yeah. Okay. Now we're going into the next level of context, which is the cultural context of the Roman Empire.

Right? Which you can't suss out through the letter. No. However, it's addressed to Rome. Yeah.

What is Rome? Rome is the capital city Yeah. Of the empire. So alright. So there we're making an interpretive it's an interpretive reflection.

Yeah. Why would Paul see it as important to write a letter? Okay. Paul didn't start the church in Rome. We know this from the book of Acts.

And, actually, there's debate about who exactly planted and started it, but we know it wasn't Paul. So Paul is writing to a network of house churches as we're gonna see by the end of the letter. He knows a lot of people there, but there's also a lot of people he doesn't know. He's introducing himself. So that's where he is in the in the biblical story, and he's writing to followers of Jesus in Rome.

So the next moment of cultural context, what do we know about the status of followers of Jesus in Rome? We know quite a lot, actually. If you go to Acts chapter 18, after Paul left Athens this is the first sentences of Acts chapter 18. He went to Corinth, and he found a Jew met a Jew named Aquila, who, is a native of Pontus, but had recently come from Italy with his wife Prisca or Priscilla because Claudius, the Roman emperor, had commanded all of the Jews to leave Rome. Claudius expelled all of the Jews from the city of Rome.

That's a big deal. Yep. So what's that backstory all about? Mhmm. And this is actually crucial to the backstory of the letter to the Romans.

Mhmm. In forty nine AD, Claudius expelled Jews from Rome. Why did he do this? Well, there's a handful of, Roman historians who mention this. This was in forty nine AD.

There's a historian named Suetonius who says this. He says, Claudius expelled from Rome. The Jews who were constantly making disturbances at the instigation of a Chrestus. Mhmm. And then this is being quoted by another Roman historian named Erosius.

And These are messianic Jews. Correct. There's some problem happening Okay. With Jewish people in relation to a Chrestus, And it caused enough of a disturbance that Claudia said, Jews out of here. Mhmm.

So the word Christus is spelled in Latin. Mhmm. But at it's almost certainly Mhmm. Jesus' title, the Christ. Yeah.

So think. And in the book of Acts, can I think of any time where Messianic Jews who follow Jesus are trying to spread the news about Jesus and there are other Jews who are scandalized by it and riots start and disturbances start? Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's like It happens.

It happens to Paul's missionary journeys. So just imagine this then, you have a community of, Messianic Jews living in Rome. There's disturbances about them related to social unrest. The Roman governors perceive it as social unrest. Mhmm.

So let's get it rid of this problem. Yeah. Expel Let's kick them out. Kick them out. That's right.

So remember all the first generation followers of Jesus are Messianic Jews. Mhmm. So let's say by forty nine AD, you've got network of house churches in Rome. Some are gonna be Jews. Some are not gonna be Jews.

Yeah. Then one day The Jews Yeah. All the people in your house church who are Jews Yeah. Have to pack up and leave. Yeah.

That's right. And as far as we can tell, they had to leave. Let's see. The edict of Claudius, I'm quoting from Robert Jewett, his commentary on Romans. After the edict of Claudius was no longer enforced after his death in '54, the band leaders apparently began moving back to Rome.

So in other words, these Jewish Christians, Messianic Jews, started being able to go back five years later, but the house churches that they met when they returned were no longer a very friendly place for them. Mhmm. And here we move into the next layer of context, the situational context. Does that make sense how we're moving through these layers here? Mhmm.

So we know from Roman sources and the book of Acts, this backstory Mhmm. That this church got separated in terms of Jew and Gentile. Then when the Jews came back, something happened that made Paul need to write the letter to the Romans. Now I feel like you're jumping ahead for for me a little bit in that. Yeah.

So they come back. Yep. And it could be that the house churches are like, great. It could be. I'm so stoked you guys are back.

That's right. Yep. Let's pick up where we left. But you're saying that's not what happened. Mhmm.

And you get that from The letter to the Romans itself. The letter to the Romans itself. The the state of the house churches that we see in Paul's letter to the Romans is that they are fractured along the ethnic divide Mhmm. Of Jew and non Jew. How do you know this?

This is why Scott McKnight wrote the book reading Romans backwards. So let's, let's just read Romans backwards. Quick skim Romans backwards. Okay. And and for the sake of time.

If you go to chapter 16, it's one of these chapters that I think modern readers tend to skip. Oh, yeah. It's a bunch of greetings. It's a bunch of greetings. Greet Ampliatus.

Greet Apelles. Greet Herodians. Greet Rufus. Also his mother and mine and so on. Mhmm.

But, if you really spend some time and if historians dig into what's going on here, what you're able to reconstruct is about half a dozen house churches that he names right here. Mhmm. He names five different house churches or groups. These names are all they're mostly Greek. There are some Jewish and some Latin.

Mhmm. So we got the ethnic and ethnic mix here. Mhmm. Look at verse 17. This is Romans chapter 16 verse 17.

Now I urge you brothers and sisters, keep your eye on anyone who causes dissension and hindrances contrary to the teaching that you learned and turn away from those people. Such men are slaves not of our Lord Jesus Messiah but of their own appetites and by smooth flattering words they're deceiving the hearts of unsuspecting people. So in other words, why did he write the letter to the Romans? There's a group of people causing dissension and division in the house churches that are ethnically diverse. Well, let's let's use Barclays, though.

Maybe. This is one statement. Yep. That's right. That's right.

This could be that he's like, oh, yeah. By the way Mhmm. Don't cause divisions. Keep your eye on those who cause division and don't associate with them. Yeah.

That's what he says. Okay. There's some group in Rome because he says these people Mhmm. Are. It's an actual group of people.

I see. So question is, okay. Where else if I go if I read Romans backwards Mhmm. Where else do I go to see Paul addressing what this division is in the church? Oh, yes.

It's the previous two chapters. Chapters fourteen and fifteen. So if we consider chapter fourteen and fifteen, Paul starts describing two groups in the house churches of Rome. He calls one group he has two titles for these two groups. There's two groups.

In Romans 15, he calls one group, he calls them the powerful in verse one, the Greek word dunitas, the powerful. Are you with me? Mhmm. He says, now we who are the dunitas, the powerful, we ought to bear the weaknesses of those without power. Why did he say we?

Because he includes himself among In this group. The dunitas. Yep. The powerful. So we who are powerful should bear the weaknesses of those who have no power.

And we shouldn't just please ourselves, going down I'm skipping down to verse seven now. We should welcome one another just as the Messiah welcomed you all to the glory of God. What he's saying in this paragraph is the Messiah made paved the way so that non Jews could be incorporated in the family of Abraham. So right now, he he paints it as in terms of, like, rank and power. Mhmm.

There's a group that has power and status. Mhmm. There's a group that's without power and without status. Mhmm. And the powerful should accept those without power.

If you go to chapter 14, he has different terminology for these two groups. He calls one the weak or the weak in faith. Actually, here, I'll just read the opening lines here of Romans 14. He says now, you should accept the one who is weak in faith, but not for the purposes of passing judgment on his opinions. Listen.

One person has faith that he can eat all kinds of food, but the one who is weak will only eat vegetables. The one who eats This is about temple sacrifice. Shouldn't regard with contempt the one who doesn't eat. The one who does eat should not pass judgment on the one who does eat, for God has accepted him. Who are you that you should judge the servant of another?

To his own master he stands or falls and he will stand for the Lord's able to make him stand. Verse five, one person might regard one day as more important than another. Another person regards every day the same. Every person should be convinced in his own mind. So there's some division between two groups of people about food and days.

Sacred days. Totally. Yeah. And you're like, oh, okay. We're in very recognizable territory here of the Jew, non Jew, kosher food laws.

Yeah. Kosher food law is not about being vegetarian. Oh, yeah. Oh, totally. Really?

Yeah. Think of Daniel chapter one. Oh. Yeah. That's true.

But there's meat you can eat and kosher diet. Totally. But if you're in a room where there is non non kosher meat Then you're just not gonna eat. I'm not gonna eat any of this meat. Yeah.

So oftentimes, your kosher diet Requires practically makes you a vegetarian. That's a plant based diet from the first century. Yeah. Yep. Yep.

So what we have to do is reconstruct here. Here, I'm just gonna quote Scott McKnight, who's this is a big part of his book. He says, so if you profile the the whole book, the weak are Jewish believers, messianic Jews, who see themselves in the stream of God's elect people. They know and practice the Torah, still probably attend synagogue, but they are sitting in judgment on Gentiles, especially the powerful of the Christian community in Rome, even though they, these Jews passing judgment, have no power or status. He's painting the whole profile here of you got messianic Jews who were expelled by the emperor.

Now, but Paul puts himself in the category of a powerful. Yes. That's that's he does. Yes. It's, Jewish believers who and then you profile them.

They see themselves as the truly elect ones. Mhmm. They know and practice the Torah. They probably still attend synagogue. And they're sitting in judgment on Gentiles.

Mhmm. This is a good example of Barclay's criteria. Why else does he have to say, let the one who is weak in faith or the one who chooses not to eat non kosher food, he should not pass judgment on those who will eat any kind of food. So that's a prohibition. Mhmm.

Yeah. Don't do this thing. Which is too Don't do the passing judgment. Oh, there are people who are Passing judgment. Eating kosher and they're passing judgment on people who don't eat kosher.

You can see that in the rear view mirror. Yeah. Then you have to look over your shoulder and begin to pay look for historical plausibility Mhmm. Elsewhere in the New Testament. Is this a thing?

Oh, yes. So then now I can start going to Galatians or the book of Acts. Mhmm. And yes, this is the Jew Gentile divide. Yeah.

Yeah. So if I paint that whole picture Mhmm. Scott's giving the result now Yeah. Of all of his all of his own study. He says the powerful are predominantly Gentiles, but not only because Paul sees himself among the powerful.

Says they believe in Jesus as Messiah. They don't observe Torah Mhmm. As God's will for them. Mhmm. And they have condescending and despising attitudes towards Jews.

Yeah. Especially messianic Jews Mhmm. In Rome. Because they have a higher superior social status. They weren't Because they're in Rome.

Yeah. They're in Rome. They're non Jews. Yeah. Many of them are likely citizens and they weren't just reasonably expelled.

Yeah. If you just got expelled Yeah. For being in a certain ethnic group Yeah. You're you're a lesser. You are a severe disadvantage in terms of your social rank.

Got it. So the tension between these, back to Scott, is not just a matter of theological difference. That's how often this is painted. Mhmm. As these are the chapters about debatable manners.

That's how I've taught this chapter before. Yeah. But when he uses the phrase the dunitas and the ad dunitas, the powerful and the non the people without power, those are social status terms. Mhmm. So essentially, here's the way, you know, here's the what do you get?

The goodies at the end of all of this work. Is that the letter to the Romans isn't an abstract theological essay on justification. Mhmm. It's a pastoral theology trying to unify a church across a divided ethnic line Yeah. Of Jew and non Jew.

What Scott does then is he goes through every section of letter and can show how It's connected to that. It's addressing specifically that issue. Now, he'll float above it and paint a larger theology of justification and Abraham and faith. Talked about, which we said, once you look at the situational context Yeah. Right.

Yeah. That's right. You can kind of almost like it pokes a hole that you can then Mhmm. Look through and see some Yes. Grander theology.

Yep. That's right. Yeah. Man, he he has an exposition of Romans twelve and thirteen, which are are famously this is in chapter 13 where he says, be subject to the governing powers. Mhmm.

All of this? Pay your taxes. Mhmm. Why does he have to say that? We're barely ten years away from the Jewish war against Rome Mhmm.

In Jerusalem. Revolt is in the air. Mhmm. Would there be good reason or would there be motivation for Jews in Rome, Messianic Jews in Rome who give their allegiance to king Jesus to say, like, just give the emperor the finger. I'm not gonna give him my taxes.

Right. I've got two cousins who are forming the militia down in Judea. Mhmm. And they're gonna declare war on him. Mhmm.

And so I'll give them some Totally. So Paul in Romans 13 is commending the way of non violence. And listen, like, it's not like he's in love with Rome. Right. Yeah.

He's been beat up by Rome. But he Paul has a different long game strategy Mhmm. For how to live under Roman occupation. Mhmm. And it doesn't involve resistance and violent revolt.

So he commends them to pay their taxes. Mhmm. So to me, a chapter like that, seeing it in the context really helps. Yeah. Because then also it begins to help us see how we should and should not be quoting that passage in the service of certain agendas in our own day.

I think, that's a whole other conversation. But to me, that's what really, where this cashes out. This whole approach of reading the letters helps us is I want the ways that Roman speaks to the twenty first century to be consistent with not just his words, but with what he was doing with his words in the cultural and situational context. And it requires a lot a lot of thoughtfulness. It's a kind of thoughtfulness that isn't always at work in how people quote from the New Testament letters today.

I think my biggest out of this whole conversation is that these are not theological essays. Mhmm. And while there is theology undergirding them Mhmm. That you can get to, you get to it from an understanding of what these letters were addressing. Mhmm.

And then it takes a lot of discernment then to figure out Mhmm. Okay. Now in my situational context Yeah. That's right. And my social context Yeah.

We're arguably in the same part of the story of the narrative of the Bible. Yeah. That's right. We talked about movement five versus movement six. Yeah.

That's right. Yeah. But they're pretty similar. We are in the same point in the story as the apostles. Yeah.

Post resurrection and ascension of Jesus. Yes. Making disciples. Before the new creation. Waiting for new creation.

Yep. But we live in a radically different cultural setting. Yes. You and I do. Yeah.

Actually, everyone does. No one lives in the ancient Roman Empire in the world today. But people live under, in empires still. That's right. Dictatorships.

Dictatorships. Yeah. It's not entirely governments. Honorshame cultures. Yeah.

So there's there's a yep. There's some similarities. Yeah. How do I take Paul's theology and then apply that to my context? Mhmm.

Well, it's first realizing that Paul isn't giving you his theology right out the bat. That's right. You actually have to then go, well, what's the context Mhmm. That he was Mhmm. Speaking into?

Mhmm. And now through that lens, what can I understand of his theology? Mhmm. Actually, also through the lens of just his theology came from Jesus and the way of Jesus and then through the Hebrew scriptures. Yeah.

Yeah. And then now how do I apply that theology to my context? And that is not as simple as God said it, that settles it Yeah. Kind of reading of Yeah. The New Testament.

Yeah. That's right. Yeah. And as we opened this particular, series on the letters, I think the stakes are high in this section of the Bible because, again, they're so quotable. Right.

It's easier to take them out of context statements out of context than many other parts of the Bible. And so I think it really pays off to develop a thoughtful set of reading skills for how to make sense of these letters. I think one of the fears that people have is that if you don't just go, hey, the Bible says it. Let's take it face value and then apply that thing. Mhmm.

Then you get into murky waters and then whose interpretation is right. Sure. And then That's right. The whole thing falls apart. Sure.

Well, that's a little catastrophic. But No. I you hear that. But it's true. No.

That's exactly right. Yeah. I've heard that verbatim. Yeah. Okay.

Yeah. Yeah. But that's an that's an extreme. Yeah. But there's there's a sense of the way that you're walking through.

Mhmm. No. There's guardrails. Layers of context. Yeah.

And then there's guardrails within how to make sure you're doing this in a way that it has fidelity. Because the face value meaning of Paul's words, for example, to a twenty first century American reading them in English, like, the assumption is what it means to me in English Yeah. Living in Portland is, of course, its natural basic meaning. And I think I'm trying to poke at that assumption and be like, why do I assume that the first thing that occurs to me reading Paul's letter in English is what God means Mhmm. For all people of all time.

If anything, I should give this way more thought. Yeah. And invest in a set of responsible reading skills Mhmm. To understand what Paul was doing so that I can understand what the spirit is saying through Paul's letter to churches in other contexts. Yeah.

I hope we do the same with Jesus Lot of work. With Jesus himself. But communication is a lot of work. It is. Understanding someone else's communication is a lot of work.

And these letters were not written to us. Mhmm. But God gave them for us. For us. That's the line that, I first heard from the Hebrew Bible scholar, John Walton.

Mhmm. And it actually takes some unpacking. Yeah. But as a one liner, I think it gets a really important point across. Mhmm.

It was not written to me. But they're provided for us. But through God's wisdom and the work of the spirit, it is for me. Mhmm. Just as a member of the body of Christ.

And the skill set that we're developing of reading these carefully and doing detective work is very active participation Mhmm. That then needs to also be in step with God's spirit. Mhmm. And a community. And a community.

A community of other readers Mhmm. Who are also thoughtfully Which might be the translation that you are using. Yeah. That's true. That was a community of people.

Yep. But also the people you're living life with. Every translation is a product of a community of people Yeah. Reading and trying to understand these texts and your own church community. I'm speaking to you, John.

Yeah. My own church community. And then y'all, the listeners bring it wrapping it around with the with We Begin This Conversation in Texas. That is also a community of reading and interpretation, or at least it, you know, it can become one that can help help give guidance to what the spirit is saying. And what a great skill to develop, not just for reading the New Testament letters Mhmm.

But for just living life Yeah. In our context. That's a great point. Movement six Yeah. Of Yeah.

Your city Yeah. Or your cultural setting. What is the spirit up to? Yeah. What's the right thing for you to be doing?

Mhmm. There is no letter written to you, but the spirit is written to you Yeah. Or it writes to you. It's speaking to us through these texts. Through these texts, but but the skills that we develop by reading this way transfer over That's right.

To Yeah. How we, continue to live. Yeah. This is missionary correspondence. The New Testament letters are missionary correspondence.

And, yeah, I think the most responsible readings and responses to these letters will be new insights, new discoveries about our own cultural context, and how we engage them with the good news based on what we learned from this ancient missionary correspondence. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah, man. The testament letters.

Cool. Context. Context. Context. We still are going to talk about one more level of context.

Correct. Yep. And if I understand correctly, it's just the fact that the letters have a, a flow Yeah. And a logic to them Yep. That you can Yeah.

Understand. Yep. And so that'll be that'll be our final stop. Call this literary context. Literary context.

Learning to read each letter from beginning to end as a coherent flow of thought. Cool. Yeah. It's a whole other exciting world of things to talk about. Thanks for listening to this episode of Bible project Podcast.

If you're interested in submitting a question for our question response episode on the letters, we'd love to hear from you. You can record yourself asking the question and email it to info@bibleproject.com. Try to keep your question to about twenty or thirty seconds. And if you're able to transcribe it for us, gold star, a plus. It really helps us a lot sift through them.

Also, we'd love to get your name, where you're from, in your audio. Again, our email is info@bibleproject.com. Our deadline for submissions for the letters conversation is Tuesday, August 4. Also, you might have heard that we just launched some more free classes taught by Tim, and you can find all of those offerings at bibleproject.com/classroom. You could also get there by going to classroom.bible if that's easier to remember.

There's an intro to Hebrew Bible class, which is amazing. There's a really short class on the Garden of Eden, and there's another full class we just released on heaven and earth, biblical cosmology and Genesis one. It is also amazing. If you can hang with these conversations, You can hang in classroom. We'll be back with another episode next week, continuing our discussion on the other voices in the room when Paul was writing his letters.

Throughout history, readers of the New Testament letters have tended to take their experience and practice of writing a letter that they've been taught in their culture and assume that's what the apostles were doing. When you think of Paul writing one of the letters, what at least modern Westerners tend to do is imagine Paul sitting by himself, maybe in a study or a room where he has like privacy and he's producing a single unedited draft that he's gotta get out the door. Or Paul is pacing the room, talking, there's a scribe, you know, secretary getting it all down. But still, single draft, and then out the door it goes. So that is the mental image.

Paul did not have a study. He was a traveling missionary. So imagine a scenario where the most likely place where you would have room to work in would never be a private place. It would be in guest rooms, in inns, in rest stops where you would have space for Paul and Barnabas and Timothy to get together and be like, dude, I need to send a letter to Classe. Here are the issues.

These are things I've taught them in the past. Here's what I wanna say. And that these letters could have been in the making over the course of weeks and months in multiple steps. Today's show is produced by Dan Gummel. Our show notes come from Camden McAfee.

We're a crowdfunded nonprofit in Portland, Oregon, and we make free resources because of the generous support of so many people around the world just like you. Thank you for being a part of this with us. Hi. This is Renee. I'm from Virginia.

I first heard about the Bible project through Dan Gomel, who is married to my wonderful cousin, Brion. My favorite thing about the Bible project is the book that he got my son, MJ. So it's called the Read Scripture book. And if you haven't heard about it, check it out on the website. Your kids will love it.

We believe the Bible is a unified story that leads to Jesus. We're a crowdfunded project by people like me. Find free videos, study notes, podcasts, and more at thebibleproject.com. Woo hoo. Hey.

Thanks for listening to the very, very end of the episode. Since you're here, I wanted to let you know something special, which is we are hiring a couple key roles here at Bible Project. One is VP of marketing role, and the second is a creative director. These are key roles, and we're looking for the right person. And if you wanna learn more, you can check out our career page at bibleproject.com.